# Children_eco_knowledge

## What is this project?
This is the first part of a study on evolution of early life history traits in humans. 
We aim to contribute with theory and data to improve our understanding of how selective pressures shaped the time of main events in our lifetime. Along these lines, we aim to help answer questions such as why humans evolved a longer pre reproductive period than other apes, why childhood as a period of slowed growth evolved or how this affected the unique human ability to produce and support multiple dependent offspring. With our approach, we want to tackle the possible selective pressures for elongating growth. These might have been related to some of the different traits children acquire during development, such as brain size or ecological knowledge. In this project we focus on measuring knowledge in children and adolescents and which other characteristics of individuals influence it.

### Abstract

Among the hypotheses that try to explain the late age at first reproduction in humans, the Embodied Capital Hypothesis suggests that we need extra time to learn skills and information in order to exploit the complex niche we live in. Several studies tried to quantify the role of learning in the elongation of the pre-reproductive period, but in the literature is missing a broad picture of how knowledge changes with age in quantity and structure, as well as of the determinants of individual variation. 

To contribute to this debate, we plan to collect measures of individual knowledge in children of a small scale society in Zanzibar. We will record free listing of items found in the natural environment and image recognition of commonly foraged items. Additional household level data will be collected. Traits evaluated include age, activities performed and family composition.  Cross classified logistic regression models are used to determine the contribution of the various traits to knowledge. These information will allow to estimate the relation between age and ecological knowledge and to disentangle the effect of the other factors. Moreover, we will look at the latent categorization of known items and variation across ages.

### Expected effect of factors
We developed a DAG (directed acyclic graph) to clarify which are the characteristics of children we think are influencing their knowledge- as measured in their performance in the freelist. This helps with the analysis because it allows to define the functions underlying our variables. In this case, we say that knowledge of an individual (as evaluated in the free list) depends on age, activities performed and other factors:
Knowledge changes as individual get older. We expect to observe an increase with age, with individual differences that can emerge as a result of several factors. Age has a direct effect on knowledge, in virtue of the increasing cognitive abilities of human brains that allow to store and manage information (Age -> Know). Family context, such as the presence of parents or older siblings, influences what and how much children know (Fam -> Know). Knowledge also depends on the activities individual perform, because of the exposure to the relevant information and of the returns from learning these information (Act -> Know).  Schooling could have an effect on the amount of information individual can manage, but most probably it reduces the contact with natural environment and thus the knowledge of it (Sch -> Know). As individuals age, they both perform new or different activities and have different probability of access to schools (Age -> Act and Age -> Sch). At the same time, the family context also influences  activities performed and schooling as the absence of parents or the birth of new siblings impose to reallocate time or energies of children accordingly (Fam -> Act and Fam -> Sch). Finally, the sex of individuals determines both which activities are performed, some tasks being typically done by girls and other by boys, as well as school attendance, since boys often receive higher investment in a family (Sex -> Act and Sex -> Sch).
Summarizing, we expect knowledge to be determined by age, as younger children don’t know as much as older children; by activities performed, as certain activities favor the learning of ecological knowledge; by family, as access to knowledge depends on the access to older individuals able to transmit it, for example; and probably by access to schools, that provide certain types of knowledge but not others. 

## Data
### Study population
The population with which data will be collected lives in Pemba, Tanzania. This is the northernmost island  of  the  archipelago  of  Zanzibar,  50km  from  the  east  coast  of  Africa,  in  the  Indian  Ocean. Pemba’s climate and geological composition make it the most fertile of the Spices Island. Its coastal Swahili population lives off small scale agriculture, fishing and an historically relevant productionof cloves. They also partially rely on natural resources for subsistence.  Children and teenagers, in particular, engage in many forms of foraging. The village where the research will be conducted, Bandari Kuu, lies close to the north west coast of the island. The houses and the fields are enclosedbetween coastal mangroves and the main forest of Pemba, Ngezi. This gives children the opportunity to hunt birds and other animals living in the forest, as well as to collect shellfish and harvestdifferent types of marine resources.

### Data collection
Data  will  be  collected  between  May  and  September  2019.   All  interviews  will  be  performed  in Swahili, mother tongue of the informants. Data will be collected in two phases:
1. Household level survey. Census of all of the households in the village that agree to be part ofthe study (total 150 ca) and reproductive history of women. No individual payment is budgeted (but probably a contribution to village infrastructure or social life). 
2. Individual level interview to a subset of the total population between 5 and 20 years old. Participants recruited between individuals who volunteer for being interviewed. The interview will include a set of free listing questions and an image recognition test. The interview will be recorded and the file processed to extract the data.

## Data analysis
### Mock analysis
We developed the statistical models on simulated data before collecting real data. This allows, on the one hand, to develop a statistical analysis able to properly explore the causal relations between the variables considered in the model. On the other hand, it helps to define which structure the data to be collected should have in order to be analyzed in the model. The simulated data were constructed according to the imagined generative process for the data.
In file v_pemba.r, I started by creating a bunch of people (N) with age (5 to 20) and sex (-1 or 1). Each individual belong to a household and the other individuals within the same household are its older and younger siblings. In each household lives also a certain number of people above 20 years of age. Children have spent a certain number of years going to school. All children below seven years and a certain proportion of the total population have never been to school. Seven years and older children have spent some years in school, with older children that can have more years of schooling. One of the two sexes has, on average, less years of education. A higher number of siblings also reduces schooling. Children can perform any of the possible activities. Each of these is more common among older than younger children, at different levels, and some activities are practiced more by children of one of the two sexes. School years reduce the probability of performing certain activities, whereas the number of siblings can have positive or negative effect. This way all mock children have individual characteristics.
Now I assign them species known (equivalent to listed in the free list, whereas the not known are those not listed). A certain number of species were created with a curve of probabilities of being known at different ages. Each species can be listed by each child. The probability of it being listed increases with age, as children knowledge increase. Each child's knowledge of species depends, thus on its age. Other traits of the child affect the probability of knowing each species: the activities a child practices create an offset of ‘knowledge years’. For example, by practicing an activity, a child has the same probability of knowing a species of older children (or younger, as some activities impede the acquisition of ecological knowledge). Years spent in school reduce the probability of knowing a species. The same does the number of younger siblings, while the number of older siblings increases species known (i.e. the position in the sibship has an effect). Adults in the household also increase knowledge, each additional adult adding a bit less knowledge than the previous one. At the end, each individual receives a list of species known. The probability of a species to be known depends on the age of the child, on the activities performed, on the number of years the child spent in school and on the number of adults in the household as well as on the number of younger and older siblings
In timed_pemba.r, I simulated the audio record of the freelist data, where children name species that belong to different groups sequentially and each word is named at a specific time. Species of the same group are listed in a sparse order within the group, before changing to naming the species of another group. The time lag between items in the same group is shorter than the time lag between items of a different group. In the picture, each line is the freelist of a child, and time is on the horizontal axis. The words belong to different groups, as shown by their color, and they’re named at sequential times. The time between items of different groups is on average longer. 
These data are not fully representative of what we expect to have from the actual freelist. There is no effect of age or other characteristics on how children group items yet. On the contrary, all children include the species in exactly the same categories. But they are a start to start developing a model to analyze this kind of data.

### Analysis
We made two main types of models to analyze these mock data. They are developed in a Bayesian framework and approach separatedly the total amount of knolwedge of children and the structure of this knowledge as emerging by the grouping in the freelist. The first model is a cross classified logistic regression which includes the effect on knowledge of individual children and species, as well as children age, family, activities practiced and years of school. The probability of a species being known by a child depends on the child, the species and the child’s characteristics. You can find the full and partial models in analysis.r. 
The second group of models are Hidden Markov Models. They infer the category of each item listed by the time passing between the word and the preceding one.
